The College of Computer Studies started as the AUF Computer Center which was conceptualized as a pilot project of Dr. Teresita B. Ireneo, then the Dean of the College of Business and Economics and Philippine Encoding Corporation (PENCOR). After a very successful class demonstration in June 1983, and after receiving its government recognition, the center started its formal operation. 

On October 05, 1990, the University entered into a collaboration with ATS Technologies, Inc., which is based in Singapore, designating the center as an Authorized Advanced Training Center (AATC) for ATS software 

In May 1992, the Computer Technology Center (CTC) became the College of Computer Studies (CCS) when the Department of Education, Culture and Sports granted the permit to offer BS Computer Science and Associate in Computer Science degrees. The College was eventually renamed as College of Computer Studies when it started to offer B.S. Information Technology 

To date, the University has earned the distinction of being the only Nodal Station of Central Luzon which provides information technology training programs to different educational institutions in Central Luzon.  

The College was also identified by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) as the Center of Excellence in Information Technology Education in 2007 because of its leadership and commitment to advancing IT education through competent instruction and state-of-the-art facilities.  As such, it receives support and subsidy from CHED for projects aimed at improving the quality of IT education in the region.   

With its continuous commitment to excellence, The Federation of Accrediting Agencies of the Philippines (FAAP) granted the Level I Accredited Status for the BS Computer Science and BS Information Technology for having satisfactorily met the standards and fulfilled all the requirements of the Philippine Accrediting Association of Schools, Colleges, and Universities (PAASCU) last June 2010.  In April 2013, Level II Accredited Status was granted and Re-accredited in March 2016. 

At present, the College was again identified by CHED as one of the Centers of Excellence in Information Technology Education effective January 2016 – December 2018. 